Early childhood is spent in chronic
states of psychological collapse and
reconstitution. Spilled your milk,
absolute breakdown. Mom left for work,
temporary loss of identity. Got punished
for coloring on the wall, collapse of
self-image into intolerable badness
accompanied by uncontrollable screaming,
and an inability to perceive the
caregiver as a good object. What was
formerly a good self in a diatic blend
with a good object has now become a bad
self in a diatic blend with a hatefilled
and rejecting bad object. That is until
your caregiver gives you a hug, wipes
away your tears, and reassures you that
you're still good and loved. Now
everything is magically okay again. It's
through this cycle of breakdown and
reconstitution that more mature
capacities emerge. But when breakdowns
are not followed by reconstitution, when
there is a significant disparity between
what the child needs and what the early
care environment provides, mature ego
capacities may fail to develop. The
immature self remains illdefined, stuck
with contradictory, terrifying,
overwhelming, or disorganizing fragments
of experience that can't be integrated.
In the absence of adequate structuring
and repair, the child is forced to rely
on psychotic or borderline level
defenses which either distort reality or
distort identity to prevent total
annihilation of the